README.md, before:

# N v1.4 TAS

Info & tooling for making a Tool-Assisted Speedrun (TAS) for the popular 1.4 version of [Metanet N - the way of the Ninja](https://www.metanetsoftware.com/game/n).

![Screenshot of N running in libTAS](screenshot.png)

## What this repository contains

- Information about TASing N v1.4 (this file)
- [python script to convert N demos into libTAS inputs](converter.py)
- [bash](build_demo.sh) and [python](builder.py) scripts working together to recreate the libTAS demo from [level demo data](tas/level_data.yml)
- [Data to build the TAS](tas/): info for each level (including demos), loading times, click coordinates
- [Script to create level data from a local database](make_rta_level_data.py) (used to create [RTA data](tas/level_data_rta.yml))
- [Lua script to display overlay information](display_infos.lua.template) (demo information, real-time inputs)
- [Other Lua scripts to help TASing](volume/lua)
- [Python script to get demo data from .sol file](sol_to_demo.py)
- [Other tools and informations from external sources](external/)

## Links
### Instruction pages
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS/Usage
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/Ruffle
- https://tasvideos.org/Platforms#AdobeFlash
### Tools & their bugtrackers
- https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS
- https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS/issues
- https://github.com/ruffle-rs/ruffle/issues
### Forums
- [Discord channel where we discuss this TAS](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896)
- [TAS thread on N forum](https://forum.droni.es/viewtopic.php?f=20&t=4468&p=177293&sid=6f5f179201d5b44d889afbe5865cb685#p177293)
- [tasvideos.org: N TAS](https://tasvideos.org/Forum/Topics/9371)
- [tasvideos.org: Running Flash games in libTAS](https://tasvideos.org/Forum/Topics/20547)
### Documentation
- [Thread on air speed](https://forum.droni.es/viewtopic.php?f=20&t=10336&sid=569eab4beeecd814135f67b0fa574a3a)
- [Stumbles](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1431062811903266957)
- [Hitboxes sizes](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1437946735665352714)
- [Finding coordinates for tile bwj](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1458230806383427790)
- [Drone detection](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1458621494224490527)
- [Metanet tutorial on N physical collision system](https://edelkas.github.io/n/index/docs.html)
- [Nclone, Python emulator of the N++ engine (some parts are similar to N v1.4)](https://github.com/SimonV42/nclone)
- [Nclone: Part handling ceiling crushing](https://github.com/SimonV42/nclone/blob/842190b2a216579b5b5c551e0a0b4505fc3381cc/nsim.py#L299-L302)
### TAS Tutorials for other games
- Undertale https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFCnTeTdD2k&t=712s
- HK https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qQAJk5_LUvg

## Todo
- Make script to display information for finale encode: TAS and 0th author, frames and time gain
- Add drone detection frame (for 1st chase)
- speed extraction still doesn't work for some grounded levels: 01-0, 02-0, 03-1, 37-0, 63-1, 80-2, 81-0, 82-0, 87-0, 88-1
- Sort Readme into several files for better readability
- Find drone position in memory and draw raycasting on detection frame
- Figure out something to optimize corner jumps
- automatically update README with current progress/stats
- TAS the remaining 388 levels ;)

## Install

### Linux

Just build the docker container using the [Dockerfile](Dockerfile):

```
docker build --tag libtas .
```

#### Run

```
docker run -it --rm -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix -v $HOME/.Xauthority:/root/.Xauthority:rw --net=host -v /home/$whoami/nv14_TAS/volume:/home/ libtas
```

Inside container:
```
/root/src/libTAS/build/AppDir/usr/bin/libTAS /root/src/ruffle/target/release/ruffle_desktop -g gl --no-gui /home/n_v14.swf &
```
(Or just press up arrow, as these commands are saved as previous command in bash history)

### Windows

In order to make it possible to TAS any game, libTAS uses tools that do not work properly in Windows. For that reason, it only works on Linux. If you're on Windows, you can use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run libTAS.

To install WSL for libTAS, please follow Step 1 of this guide: https://clementgallet.github.io/libTAS/guides/wsl/

Once you have WSL set up, install git to be able to clone this repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/Perdu/nv14_TAS.git
```

Then run the script to install everything:

```
./nv14_TAS/install_windows_wsl.sh
```

#### Run

```
/home/$(whoami)/libTAS/build/AppDir/usr/bin/libTAS /home/$(whoami)/ruffle/target/release/ruffle_desktop -g gl --no-gui /home/$(whoami)/nv14_TAS/volume/n_v14.swf &
```

## Usage

### Basic libTAS usage

https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS?tab=readme-ov-file#run

https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS/Usage
- frame advancing, using the V key
- pause/play, using the C key
- fast forward, using the tab key

Use Shift+F1-10 to save state and F1-10 to reload state.

Use Ctrl+F1-10 to reload a *branch*. A branch is created automatically when creating the associated savestate. Basically, this allows you to reload inputs the way they were defined when you made the savestate (be careful to make a savestate before loading a branch to avoid losing your progress).

You can press on individual frames to go there, provided you have a saved state before

## Optimization level in tas/level_data.yml

Jumping gives slightly more speed than running. As I was not aware that this kind of subpixel optimization was possible in this game (and because it takes a lot of time to optimize), this is not done for a lot of level. I indicate this in the [level demo data](tas/level_data.yml) file, with `optimization_level`:
- 1 (or nothing): level TASed without subpixel optimization
- 2: level TASed with subpixel optimization

## Video encoding

I used default settings for encoding.

Since youtube will downgrade videos smaller than 720p to 30fps, I upscaled the video to ensure it stays in 60fps:

```
ffmpeg -i 'n_rta_hs.mkv' -vf scale=-1:720 'n_rta_hs_upscaled.mkv'
```

This significantly *reduced* the size of the video because the fixed bitrate is removed.

Disable Settings → Audio → Audio Control → Disable to have sound in encoding.

## Known issues

Troubleshooting: see [troubleshoot.md](doc/troubleshoot.md)

No sound: this is normal and you don't need it. See [sound.md](doc/sound.md) if you really want it.

### Texture problem
Reported [here](https://github.com/ruffle-rs/ruffle/issues/21776)

Ruffle does not properly display all textures.

Adding `-g gl` removes error in stdout, but doesn't solve the issue.

N2 (swf Linux version) does not have the issue

## Technical information for submission

See [doc/technical_info.md](doc/technical_info.md)

Commit message:

Readme: explain how to TAS N levels

README.md, after:

# N v1.4 TAS

Info & tooling for making a Tool-Assisted Speedrun (TAS) for the popular 1.4 version of [Metanet N - the way of the Ninja](https://www.metanetsoftware.com/game/n).

![Screenshot of N running in libTAS](screenshot.png)

## What this repository contains

- Information about TASing N v1.4 (this file)
- [python script to convert N demos into libTAS inputs](converter.py)
- [bash](build_demo.sh) and [python](builder.py) scripts working together to recreate the libTAS demo from [level demo data](tas/level_data.yml)
- [Data to build the TAS](tas/): info for each level (including demos), loading times, click coordinates
- [Script to create level data from a local database](make_rta_level_data.py) (used to create [RTA data](tas/level_data_rta.yml))
- [Lua script to display overlay information](display_infos.lua.template) (demo information, real-time inputs)
- [Other Lua scripts to help TASing](volume/lua)
- [Python script to get demo data from .sol file](sol_to_demo.py)
- [Other tools and informations from external sources](external/)

## Links
### Instruction pages
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS/Usage
- https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/Ruffle
- https://tasvideos.org/Platforms#AdobeFlash
### Tools & their bugtrackers
- https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS
- https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS/issues
- https://github.com/ruffle-rs/ruffle/issues
### Forums
- [Discord channel where we discuss this TAS](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896)
- [TAS thread on N forum](https://forum.droni.es/viewtopic.php?f=20&t=4468&p=177293&sid=6f5f179201d5b44d889afbe5865cb685#p177293)
- [tasvideos.org: N TAS](https://tasvideos.org/Forum/Topics/9371)
- [tasvideos.org: Running Flash games in libTAS](https://tasvideos.org/Forum/Topics/20547)
### Documentation
- [Thread on air speed](https://forum.droni.es/viewtopic.php?f=20&t=10336&sid=569eab4beeecd814135f67b0fa574a3a)
- [Stumbles](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1431062811903266957)
- [Hitboxes sizes](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1437946735665352714)
- [Finding coordinates for tile bwj](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1458230806383427790)
- [Drone detection](https://discord.com/channels/197765375503368192/199460839252688896/1458621494224490527)
- [Metanet tutorial on N physical collision system](https://edelkas.github.io/n/index/docs.html)
- [Nclone, Python emulator of the N++ engine (some parts are similar to N v1.4)](https://github.com/SimonV42/nclone)
- [Nclone: Part handling ceiling crushing](https://github.com/SimonV42/nclone/blob/842190b2a216579b5b5c551e0a0b4505fc3381cc/nsim.py#L299-L302)
### TAS Tutorials for other games
- Undertale https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EFCnTeTdD2k&t=712s
- HK https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qQAJk5_LUvg

## Todo
- Make script to display information for finale encode: TAS and 0th author, frames and time gain
- Add drone detection frame (for 1st chase)
- speed extraction still doesn't work for some grounded levels: 01-0, 02-0, 03-1, 37-0, 63-1, 80-2, 81-0, 82-0, 87-0, 88-1
- Sort Readme into several files for better readability
- Find drone position in memory and draw raycasting on detection frame
- Figure out something to optimize corner jumps
- automatically update README with current progress/stats
- TAS the remaining 388 levels ;)

## Install

### Linux

Just build the docker container using the [Dockerfile](Dockerfile):

```
docker build --tag libtas .
```

#### Run

```
docker run -it --rm -e DISPLAY=$DISPLAY -v /tmp/.X11-unix:/tmp/.X11-unix -v $HOME/.Xauthority:/root/.Xauthority:rw --net=host -v /home/$whoami/nv14_TAS/volume:/home/ libtas
```

Inside container:
```
/root/src/libTAS/build/AppDir/usr/bin/libTAS /root/src/ruffle/target/release/ruffle_desktop -g gl --no-gui /home/n_v14.swf &
```
(Or just press up arrow, as these commands are saved as previous command in bash history)

### Windows

In order to make it possible to TAS any game, libTAS uses tools that do not work properly in Windows. For that reason, it only works on Linux. If you're on Windows, you can use the Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) to run libTAS.

To install WSL for libTAS, please follow Step 1 of this guide: https://clementgallet.github.io/libTAS/guides/wsl/

Once you have WSL set up, install git to be able to clone this repository:

```
git clone https://github.com/Perdu/nv14_TAS.git
```

Then run the script to install everything:

```
./nv14_TAS/install_windows_wsl.sh
```

#### Run

```
/home/$(whoami)/libTAS/build/AppDir/usr/bin/libTAS /home/$(whoami)/ruffle/target/release/ruffle_desktop -g gl --no-gui /home/$(whoami)/nv14_TAS/volume/n_v14.swf &
```

## Usage

### Basic libTAS usage

https://github.com/clementgallet/libTAS?tab=readme-ov-file#run

https://tasvideos.org/EmulatorResources/LibTAS/Usage
- frame advancing, using the V key
- pause/play, using the C key
- fast forward, using the tab key

Use Shift+F1-10 to save state and F1-10 to reload state.

Use Ctrl+F1-10 to reload a *branch*. A branch is created automatically when creating the associated savestate. Basically, this allows you to reload inputs the way they were defined when you made the savestate (be careful to make a savestate before loading a branch to avoid losing your progress).

You can press on individual frames to go there, provided you have a saved state before

One useful trick to compare several paths is to set options in the menu editor "disable autoscrolling" and "rewind seeks to current frame". Place yourself at a given frame, then edit earlier frames to see where that lands on current frame. This is very useful for micro-optimizations.

### TASing a N level

If no `.ltm` file already exist for that level (in [volume/n_levels/](volume/n_levels/)), create one using either:
- `./start_tas_level.sh 00-0` to create an empty one with no input
- `./start_tas_level.sh 00-0 rta` to create one with inputs from the 0th preloaded
- `./start_tas_level.sh 00-0 hs` to create one with inputs from the highscore TAS (if one exists)
- `./start_tas_level.sh 00-0 demo` to create one with inputs from a demo string (you will be prompted for it)

You can then proceed with TASing the level.

Upon launching the level, the script will perform automatic actions to extract valuable information from memory. Let it load until it's settled.

Place your notes in `Movies -> Annotations...`. Write things you tested that didn't work so that others know they're empty routes.

If you have an alt route that you want to keep, place it in a savestate (e.g. 9) and write it in the annotations.

To register a position (and try to beat it with other routes), place a space key on the frame before it, then advance one frame. The script will delete the space key, create a savestate, and save the position. You should now see a yellow circle indicating that best position, and the position of this path compared to the position of the current route at the bottom of the screen. Small indicators on the left show whether current path compares to that best path (as in being more to the left or right, up or down).

Once you're done and want to obtain the demo data:
- *Inside the docker container*, run: `./get_sol_file.sh` (this copies the sol file in a place we can get it from outside of the container)
- in the repository folder, run: `python sol_to_demo.py --save 00-0`. This will obtain the demo data and place it corectly in [tas/level_data.yml](tas/level_data.yml).

### Changing authors

To register yourself as author in a file, use:
- `./change_author.sh 00-0 "zapkt and Raif"` to change the authorship in the ltm file
- `python sol_to_demo.py -a "zapkt and Raif" --save 00-0` to change the authorship in [tas/level_data.yml](tas/level_data.yml) when getting the demo string.

## Optimization level in tas/level_data.yml

Jumping gives slightly more speed than running. As I was not aware that this kind of subpixel optimization was possible in this game (and because it takes a lot of time to optimize), this is not done for a lot of level. I indicate this in the [level demo data](tas/level_data.yml) file, with `optimization_level`:
- 1 (or nothing): level TASed without subpixel optimization
- 2: level TASed with subpixel optimization

## Video encoding

I used default settings for encoding.

Since youtube will downgrade videos smaller than 720p to 30fps, I upscaled the video to ensure it stays in 60fps:

```
ffmpeg -i 'n_rta_hs.mkv' -vf scale=-1:720 'n_rta_hs_upscaled.mkv'
```

This significantly *reduced* the size of the video because the fixed bitrate is removed.

Disable Settings → Audio → Audio Control → Disable to have sound in encoding.

## Known issues

Troubleshooting: see [troubleshoot.md](doc/troubleshoot.md)

No sound: this is normal and you don't need it. See [sound.md](doc/sound.md) if you really want it.

### Texture problem
Reported [here](https://github.com/ruffle-rs/ruffle/issues/21776)

Ruffle does not properly display all textures.

Adding `-g gl` removes error in stdout, but doesn't solve the issue.

N2 (swf Linux version) does not have the issue

## Technical information for submission

See [doc/technical_info.md](doc/technical_info.md)
